Cornell Cup Robotics is a student run organization at Cornell University that designs, manufactures, and creates innovative robotics oriented projects. Over 80 Cornell students work to create dynamic projects that bolster the ingenuity of embedded technologies. Since 2010, our projects have been showcased at many conferences and we have received support from numerous robotics and technology companies.

The objective of this team is to provide a valuable, practical experience for students with robotics and embedded systems, and to demonstrate the extraordinary technology that we are able to create.

The Cornell Cup Robotics project team has been a part of the Cornell Engineering community since 2010. Over the course of this time, the team has successfully fulfilled an educational need for a practical learning experience for students with robotics, embedded systems, and the Internet of Things.

Cornell Cup Robotics has received significant recognition over the past several years. These events include being highlighted by the White House Fact Sheet of Making in both 2015 and 2016, being featured at events such as the Embedded Research and Education Summit in 2014, the National Maker Faire, at Walt Disney World, and the NASA Kennedy Space Center. Check out our Facebook Page for up-to-date news!

Dave Schneider is the advisor of Cornell Cup Robotics.

David R. Schneider graduated from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Chemical Engineering in 1999, attended Columbia University Film M.F.A. Program in 2001, and earned his Masters and PhD from Cornell University in Mechanical Engineering with a concentration in Controls & Dynamics in 2007. David was also a screenwriter for Walt Disney Attractions Television Production.

With a strong focus on education, David's endeavors have included the creation of the Intel-Cornell Cup, Innovative Embedded Design National Competition; leading Cornell University Sustainable Design (CUSD); and the broader impacts video game creation for the NSF Expeditions in Computing Grant on Computational Sustainability. One of Schneider's big ideas was to create a competition for engineers that would reward creative and innovative problem-solving. Thanks in part to Intel CTO Justin Rattner, Schneider was invited to make a pitch to Intel and he wowed them with his idea for the "Cornell Cup USA Presented by Intel" competition.

Cornell Systems Engineering has been an avid supporter of Cornell Cup since its founding. The Systems Engineering has partnered with various sponsors, such as NASA and ARM to bring Cornell Cup to greater heights.

The original R2D2 project focused upon creating a semi-autonomous lab assistant that could navigate and map out its surrounding environment. We have since renamed that project to C1C0 and given it the ability to interact with its surroundings. This allows the droid to complete tasks such as getting food from a fridge, opening a door, recognizing and greeting individual people, and even firing a nerf dart at a target! To generate excitement and interest in robotics and engineering, the team aims to advertise the C1C0 project and generate interest in its design process through a Kickstarter campaign.

The MiniBot project aims to create a cost effective and intuitive learning platform for undergraduate and high school students to learn about the basics of robotics. The MiniBot is modular and easy to assemble so students can create anything from line followers and sumo bots to race cars with the system. The base will be compatible with both Vex and Lego pieces and will include custom electronics and modular assembly pieces. Additionally, there will be a simple user interface with a coding platform where student can quickly upload commands and code to the robot. Students will be able to do everything for the robotic design including electronics, assembly, and the coding commands.