Darth Vader
Darth Vader is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise. The character is a primary
antagonist in the original trilogy and a primary protagonist in the prequel trilogy. Star
Wars creator George Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the
franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".[3]

Anakin Skywalker
Darth Vader
Star Wars character

Originally a slave on Tatooine, Anakin Skywalker is a Jedi prophesied to bring balance
to the Force. He is lured to the dark side of the Force by Palpatine and becomes a Sith
lord. After a lightsaber battle with his former mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi, in which he is
severely injured, Vader is transformed into a cyborg. He then serves the Galactic Empire
as its chief enforcer until he ultimately redeems himself by saving his son, Luke
Skywalker, and killing Palpatine, sacrificing his own life in the process.[4] He is also the
secret husband of Padmé Amidala, father of Princess Leia, and grandfather of Kylo Ren.
The character has been portrayed by numerous actors: David Prowse physically portrayed
Vader while James Earl Jones voiced him in the original trilogy, and Sebastian Shaw
portrayed the unmasked Anakin in Return of the Jedi, as well as the character's spirit in
the original release of that film. Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen played the character
in the prequel trilogy in the first and next two films, respectively, and the latter also
replaced Shaw as Anakin's spirit with the 2004 re-release of Return of the Jedi. His
cinematic appearances span the first six Star Wars films, as well as Rogue One. He is
referenced in both The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, and makes vocal cameos as
both Vader and Anakin in The Rise of Skywalker. He also appears in television series
(most substantially The Clone Wars) and numerous iterations of the Star Wars Expanded
Universe, including video games, novels, and comic books.
Darth Vader has become one of the most iconic villains in popular culture, and has been
listed among the greatest villains and fictional characters ever.[5][6] The American Film
Institute listed him as the third greatest movie villain in cinema history on 100 Years... 100
Heroes and Villains, behind Hannibal Lecter and Norman Bates.[7] His role as a tragic
hero in the saga was also met with positive reviews.[8][9]

David Prowse as Darth Vader in The
Empire Strikes Back (1980)
First
Star Wars (1977)
appearance
Created by

George Lucas

Portrayed
by

as Darth Vader:

Bob Anderson (Episodes
V–VI, stunts)
Hayden Christensen
(Episode III)
Spencer Wilding/Daniel
Naprous (Rogue One)

Contents

as Anakin Skywalker:

Creation and development
Name
Concept and writing
Design
Portrayals
Characteristics
Appearances
Skywalker saga
Other Star Wars films
Television series
Canon literature
Virtual reality game
Legends
Video games
Other
Cultural impact
Relationships
Family tree
Mentorship tree

David Prowse (Episodes
IV–VI)

Sebastian Shaw
(Episode VI)[a]
Jake Lloyd (Episode I)
Hayden Christensen
(Episodes II–III, VI)[a]
Voiced by

as Darth Vader:
James Earl Jones
(Episodes III–VI, IX,
Rogue One, Rebels)
Ben Burtt (vocal effects)
Brock Peters (radio
drama)
Matt Sloan (Soulcalibur
IV, Lego Star Wars
series)
as Anakin Skywalker:

References
Sources

Hayden Christensen
(Episode IX; archive
audio on Rebels and The
Clone Wars TV
series)[1][2]

Further reading
External links

David Birney (radio
drama)

Creation and development

Mat Lucas (Clone Wars)
Matt Lanter (The Clone
Wars film and TV series,
Rebels, Forces of
Destiny and Disney
Infinity 3.0)

Name
Various combinations of names for the character were
built upon the phrase "Dark Water". Then Lucas "added
lots of last names, Vaders and Wilsons and Smiths, and
[he] just came up with the combination of Darth and
Vader." After the release of The Empire Strikes Back
(1980), Lucas said the name Vader was based upon the
German/Dutch-language homophone vater or vader,
meaning 'father', making the name representative of a
"Dark Father".[10] Other words which may have inspired
the name are "death" and "invader",[11] as well as the
name of a high school upperclassman of Lucas's, Gary
Vader.[12][13]

In-universe information
Full name

Anakin Skywalker

Alias

The Chosen One

Nickname

Ani

Gender

Male

Title

Darth Vader

Occupation Slave (Episode I)

George Lucas, Vader's
creator

As no other character with the title "Darth" was
introduced until the release of The Phantom Menace
(1999),[b] some viewers interpreted it as the character's
first name, in part because Obi-Wan Kenobi addresses him as "Darth" in the original
film.[14] The moniker is bestowed upon Anakin in Revenge of the Sith (2005) upon his
turn to the dark side of the Force.

Padawan (Episode II)
Jedi Knight (Episode III,
The Clone Wars)
Member of the Jedi High
Council (Episode III)
Jedi General in the
Grand Army of the
Republic (The Clone
Wars)

Director Ken Annakin's films Swiss Family Robinson and Battle of the Bulge influenced
the original trilogy,[15] leading some to believe that Anakin was named after him. Lucas's
publicist denied this following Annakin's death in 2009.[16] Anakin and Luke's original
surname "Starkiller" remained in the script until a few months into filming Star Wars,
when it was dropped due to what Lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with Charles
Manson and replaced with "Skywalker".[17][c]

Dark Lord of the Sith
(Episodes III–VI, Rogue
One, Rebels)
Supreme Commander of
the Imperial Military
(Episodes III–VI, Rogue
One, Rebels)

Concept and writing
In the first draft of The Star Wars, tall, grim general "Darth Vader" was already close in
line with his final depiction, and the protagonist Annikin Starkiller had a role similar to
that of his son Luke's as the 16-year-old son of a respected warrior.[19] Originally, Lucas
conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the
Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler. In developing the backstory for The Empire Strikes
Back, Lucas condensed this into one character in the form of Darth Vader.[20]
After the success of the original Star Wars (1977),[d] Lucas hired science-fiction author
Leigh Brackett to write the sequel with him. They held story conferences and, by late
November 1977, Lucas had produced a handwritten treatment. In the first draft that
Brackett would write from this, Luke's father appears as a ghost to instruct Luke.[21]
Lucas was disappointed with the script, but Brackett died of cancer before he could
discuss it with her.[22] With no writer available, Lucas wrote the next draft himself. In this
draft, dated April 1, 1978, he made use of a new plot twist: Vader claiming to be Luke's
father.[23] According to Lucas, he found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the
year-long struggles writing the first film.[24] Lucas has said that he knew Vader was
Luke's father while writing the first film,[25] though the relationship is not evidenced
before said draft of The Empire Strikes Back.[23][26]

Affiliation

Watto's shop
Jedi Order
Galactic Republic
Sith Order
Galactic Empire

Family

Shmi Skywalker (mother)
Cliegg Lars (step-father)
Owen Lars (stepbrother)
Beru Whitesun (stepsister-in-law)

Spouse

Padmé Amidala

Children

Luke Skywalker (son)
Leia Organa (daughter)

The new plot element of Luke's parentage had drastic effects on the series. Author
Michael Kaminski argues in The Secret History of Star Wars that it is unlikely that the plot
point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the
first film was clearly operating under a storyline where Vader was a separate character
from Luke's father.[27] After writing the second and third drafts in which the plot point
was introduced, Lucas reviewed the new backstory he had created: Anakin had been ObiWan Kenobi's brilliant student and had a child named Luke, but was swayed to the dark
side by Palpatine. Anakin battled Obi-Wan on the site of a volcano and was badly
wounded, but was then reborn as Vader. Meanwhile, Obi-Wan hid Luke on Tatooine
while the Galactic Republic became the tyrannical Galactic Empire and Vader
systematically hunted down and killed the Jedi.[28] This change in character would
provide a springboard to the "tragedy of Darth Vader" storyline that underlies the prequel
trilogy.
After deciding to create the prequel trilogy, Lucas indicated that the story arc would be a
tragic one depicting Anakin's fall to the dark side. He also saw that the prequels could
form the beginning of one long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with
his death. This was the final step towards turning the film series into a "saga".[29] For the
first prequel, Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Lucas made Anakin nine years
old[30][e] to make the character's separation from his mother poignant.[32] Movie trailers
focused on Anakin and a one-sheet poster showing him casting Vader's shadow informed
otherwise unknowing audiences of the character's eventual fate.[33] The movie ultimately
achieved a primary goal of introducing audiences to Anakin,[29] as well as introducing the
concept that he is the Chosen One of an ancient Jedi prophecy, destined to bring balance
to the Force. Lucas states in an interview recorded around the time of the third prequel,
Revenge of the Sith (2005), that "Anakin is the Chosen One. Even when Anakin turns
into Darth Vader, he is still the Chosen One."[34]

Relatives

Canon:
Han Solo (son-in-law)
Ben Solo (grandson)
Jobal Naberrie (mother
in-law)
Ruwee Naberrie (father
in-law)
Sola Naberrie (sister inlaw)

Legends:
Mara Jade (daughter-inlaw)
Ben Skywalker
(grandson)
Jacen Solo (grandson)
Jaina Solo
(granddaughter)
Anakin Solo (grandson)
Homeworld Tatooine

Michael Kaminski offers evidence that issues in Anakin's fall to the dark side prompted Lucas to make fundamental story changes,
first revising the opening sequence of Revenge of the Sith to have Palpatine kidnapped and his apprentice, Count Dooku, killed by
Anakin in cold blood as the first act in the latter's turn towards the dark side.[35] After principal photography was complete in 2003,
Lucas re-wrote Anakin's turn to the dark side; Anakin's fall from grace would now be motivated by a desire to save his wife, Padmé
Amidala, rather than the previous version in which that reason was one of several, including that he genuinely believed that the Jedi
were plotting to take over the Republic. This fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the principal footage, and
new and revised scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.[36]
During production of the animated The Clone Wars television series, Ahsoka Tano was developed to illustrate how Anakin develops
from the brash, undisciplined Padawan apprentice in Attack of the Clones (2002) to the more reserved Jedi Knight in Revenge of the
Sith.[37] Clone Wars supervising director and Rebels co-creator Dave Filoni said that giving Anakin responsibility for a Padawan was
meant to place the character in a role that forced him to become more cautious and responsible. It would also give him insight into his
relationship with Obi-Wan and depict how their relationship matured. Ahsoka and Anakin's relationship was seen as an essential story
arc spanning both the animated film and Clone Wars television series.[38] Filoni began thinking about the final confrontation between
Ahsoka and Vader ever since he created the former;[39] different iterations had different endings,[40] including one in which Vader
kills Ahsoka just as she slashes open his helmet to reveal his scarred face.[41] A similar scene is included in an episode of Rebels, in
which Ahsoka slashes Vader's helmet open, and the Sith lord recognizes her.[42] According to Filoni, Ahsoka's presence in the series
allows Vader to encounter the show's lead characters without the latter being "destroyed", as Ahsoka can "stand toe-to-toe" with her
former master.[43]

Design
The original design of Darth Vader's costume did not originally include a helmet. The idea that Vader should wear a breathing
apparatus was first proposed by concept artist Ralph McQuarrie during preproduction discussions for Star Wars with George Lucas in
1975. McQuarrie stated that Lucas's artistic direction was to portray a malevolent figure in a cape with samurai armor. "For Darth
Vader, George just said he would like to have a very tall, dark fluttering figure that had a spooky feeling like it came in on the
wind."[44] McQuarrie noted that the script indicated that Vader would travel between spaceships and needed to survive in the vacuum
of space, and he proposed that Vader should wear some sort of space suit. Lucas agreed, and McQuarrie combined a full-face
breathing mask with a samurai helmet, thus creating one of the most iconic designs of space fantasy cinema.[45][44] McQuarrie's 1975
production painting of Darth Vader engaged in a lightsaber duel with Deak Starkiller (a character prototype for Luke Skywalker)
depicts Vader wearing black armor, a flowing cape and an elongated, skull-like mask and helmet. Its similarity to the final design of
Vader's costume demonstrates that McQuarrie's earliest conception of Vader was so successful that very little needed to be changed for
production.[46]

Working from McQuarrie's designs, the
costume designer John Mollo devised a
costume that could be worn by an actor
on-screen using a combination of clerical
robes, a motorcycle suit, a German
military helmet and a military gas
mask.[47] The prop sculptor Brian Muir
created the helmet and armour used in the
film.[48]

Darth Vader designers

Ralph McQuarrie incorporated
samurai armor into his conceptual
designs for Vader's costume in 1975.

The sound of the respirator function of
Vader's mask was created by Ben Burtt
using modified recordings of scuba
Ralph McQuarrie
breathing apparatus used by divers.[49]
The sound effect is trademarked in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office under
Trademark #77419252 and is officially described in the documentation as "The
sound of rhythmic mechanical human breathing created by breathing through a scuba tank regulator."[50]

Brian Muir

Commentators have often pointed to the influence of Akira Kurosawa's films such as The Hidden Fortress (1958) on George Lucas,
and Vader's samurai-inspired costume design is held up as a significant example of the Japanese influences on Star Wars.[51]

Portrayals

David Prowse physically
portrayed Vader in the
original film trilogy.

Darth Vader was portrayed by bodybuilder David Prowse in the original film trilogy, and by stunt
performer Bob Anderson during the character's lightsaber fight scenes.[52][53] Lucas originally
intended for Orson Welles to voice Vader (after dismissing using Prowse's own voice due to his
English West Country accent, leading to the rest of the cast nicknaming him "Darth Farmer").[54]
After deciding that Welles's voice would be too recognizable, he cast the lesser-known James Earl
Jones instead.[55][56] Jones initially felt his contributions to the films were too small to warrant
recognition and his role was uncredited at his request until the release of Return of the Jedi
(1983).[52] When Jones was specifically asked if he had supplied Vader's voice for Revenge of the
Sith—either newly or from a previous recording—Jones answered, "You'd have to ask Lucas about
that. I don't know".[57] Hayden Christensen and Gene Bryant alternately portray Vader in Revenge of
the Sith.[58][59][60] During the production of Revenge of the Sith, Christensen asked Lucas if a special
Vader suit could be constructed to fit his own body, rather than have a different actor don one of the
original sets of Vader armor worn by Prowse.[61] Brock Peters provided the voice of Darth Vader in
the NPR/USC radio series. Both Spencer Wilding[62] and Daniel Naprous portrayed Vader in Rogue
One (2016), with Jones reprising his role as the character's voice.[63][64]

Vader's character has also been portrayed in several video games; in games such as Rebel Assault II:
The Hidden Empire and Dark Forces, visual effects artist C. Andrew Nelson appears in short
sequences in the Vader costume, voiced by Scott Lawrence. Matt Sloan, who appeared in the
YouTube parody Chad Vader, provided the voice of Darth Vader in The Force Unleashed.[65] As a result of his video game
appearances, Nelson was cast to appear as Vader in brief sequences inserted into the Special Edition of The Empire Strikes Back, in
which Vader is seen boarding his shuttle.[60]
During production of Return of the Jedi, the casting crew sought an experienced actor for the role of Anakin Skywalker since his
death was unquestionably the emotional climax of the film, and Sebastian Shaw was selected for the role.[66][f] When Shaw arrived at
the set for filming, he ran into his friend Ian McDiarmid, the actor playing the Emperor. When McDiarmid asked him what he was
doing there, Shaw responded, "I don't know, dear boy, I think it's something to do with science-fiction."[68] His presence during the
filming was kept secret from all but the minimum cast and crew, and Shaw was contractually obliged not to discuss any film secrets
with anyone, even his family. The unmasking scene, directed by Richard Marquand, was filmed in one day and required only a few
takes, with no alteration from the original dialogue.[66] Lucas personally directed Shaw for his appearance in the final scene of the
film, in which he is a Force Ghost of Anakin. Shaw's image in this scene was replaced with that of Christensen in the 2004 DVD
release. This last attempt to tie the prequel and original trilogies together proved to be possibly the most controversial change in the
Star Wars re-releases.[69][70] Shaw received more fan mail and autograph requests from Return of the Jedi than he had for any role in
the rest of his career. He later reflected that he enjoyed his experience filming Return of the Jedi and expressed particular surprise that
an action figure was made of him from the film.[66]
When The Phantom Menace was being produced, hundreds of actors were tested for the role of young Anakin[71] before the
producers settled on Jake Lloyd, who Lucas considered met his requirements of "a good actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
Producer Rick McCallum said that Lloyd was "smart, mischievous and loves anything mechanical—just like Anakin."[72][73] During

production of Attack of the Clones, casting director Robin Gurland reviewed about 1,500 other
candidates for the role of the young Anakin before Lucas eventually selected Hayden Christensen for
the role.[74] When Revenge of the Sith was being produced, Christensen and Ewan McGregor began
rehearsing their climactic lightsaber duel long before Lucas would shoot it. They trained extensively
with stunt coordinator Nick Gillard to memorize and perform their duel together. As in the previous
prequel film, McGregor and Christensen performed their own lightsaber fighting scenes without the
use of stunt doubles.[75]
Anakin has also been voiced by Mat Lucas for the 2003 micro-series Clone Wars, and by Matt
Lanter in the CGI animated film The Clone Wars, the television series of the same name and for
Anakin's small roles in the animated series Rebels and Forces of Destiny.[76] James Earl Jones
reprised the voice role for Vader's appearances in Rebels.[77][78] Both Lanter and Jones contributed
their voices for the second-season finale of Rebels, at times with identical dialogue spoken by both
actors blended together in different ways.[79]

Characteristics

James Earl Jones voiced
Darth Vader in the original
trilogy, Revenge of the Sith,
and Rogue One.

In Attack of the Clones, Anakin Skywalker feels "smothered" by Obi-Wan Kenobi and is incapable
of controlling his own life.[80] By Revenge of the Sith, however, his "father-son" friction with his
master has matured into a more equal, brotherly relationship.[81] Once he becomes Darth Vader, each evil act he commits shatters any
hope or connection towards his previous life, which makes it harder for him to return to the light,[82] but he ultimately escapes the
dark side and redeems himself by sacrificing his life to save his son, Luke Skywalker, and kill the Emperor in Return of the Jedi.[83]
Eric Bui, a psychiatrist at University of Toulouse Hospital, argued at the 2007 American Psychiatric Association convention that
Anakin Skywalker meets six of the nine diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder (BPD), one more than necessary for a
diagnosis. He and a colleague, Rachel Rodgers, published their findings in a 2010 letter to the editor of the journal Psychiatry
Research. Bui says he found Anakin Skywalker a useful example to explain BPD to medical students.[84] In particular, Bui points to
Anakin's abandonment issues and uncertainty over his identity. Anakin's mass murders of the Tusken Raiders in Attack of the Clones
and the young Jedi in Revenge of the Sith count as two dissociative episodes, fulfilling another criterion. Bui hoped his paper would
help raise awareness of the disorder, especially among teens.[84]

Appearances
Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker appears in seven of the live-action Star Wars films, the animated series The Clone Wars (including the
film), Rebels, and the micro-series Clone Wars and Forces of Destiny. He also has a main and recurring role in games, comics, books
and the non-canon Star Wars Legends material.

Skywalker saga
Original trilogy
Darth Vader first appears in Star Wars[d] as a ruthless cyborg serving the Galactic Empire.[52] He is tasked, along with Grand Moff
Tarkin (Peter Cushing), with recovering the secret plans for the Death Star superweapon, which were stolen by the Rebel Alliance.
Vader captures and tortures Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher), who has hidden the plans inside the droid R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and sent it
to find Vader's former Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) on the planet Tatooine. During Leia's rescue by Obi-Wan's allies
Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and Han Solo (Harrison Ford), Vader strikes down Obi-Wan in a lightsaber duel. Having placed a
tracking device aboard their ship, the Millennium Falcon, Vader is able to track down the Rebel base on the planet Yavin 4.[85]
During the Rebel attack on the Death Star, Vader boards his TIE fighter and attempts to shoot down Rebel X-wing fighters, but Solo
intervenes and sends Vader's ship spiraling off course, allowing Luke to destroy the Death Star.
In The Empire Strikes Back, Vader becomes obsessed with finding the Force-sensitive Luke[85] and leads his stormtroopers to attack
on the Rebel base on Hoth, which the Rebels escape. While conversing with Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) via hologram,
Vader convinces him that Luke would be a valuable ally if he could be turned to the dark side. Vader hires a group of bounty hunters
to follow Luke's friends, and negotiates with Bespin administrator Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams) to set a trap for them to bait
Luke.[85] After Han, Leia, Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) arrive, Vader tortures and freezes Han in
carbonite and gives him to the bounty hunter Boba Fett (Jeremy Bulloch).[85] When Luke arrives, Vader overpowers him in a
lightsaber duel, severing his hand. Vader tells Luke that he is his father, and tries to persuade him to join the dark side and help him
overthrow the Emperor. Horrified, Luke escapes through an air shaft. Vader telepathically tells Luke that it is his destiny to join the
dark side.[85]

In Return of the Jedi, Vader and the Emperor supervise the final stages of the second Death
Star's construction.[85] Thinking that there is still good in his father, Luke surrenders to Vader
and tries to convince him to turn from the dark side. Vader takes Luke to the Death Star to
meet the Emperor. While there, Palpatine tempts Luke to give in to his anger, which leads to
Vader dueling with Luke once again.[85] Realizing that Leia is Luke's twin sister, Vader
threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit. Furious, Luke overpowers Vader
Sebastian Shaw as the redeemed
and severs his father's cybernetic hand. The Emperor entreats Luke to kill Vader and take his
Anakin Skywalker in Return of the
place. Luke refuses and the Emperor tortures him with Force lightning. Unwilling to let his
Jedi (1983)
son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor chute to his death, but is mortally
wounded by his former master's lightning in the process.[85][86] The redeemed Anakin
Skywalker asks Luke to remove his mask, and admits that there was still good in him after all as he dies peacefully in his son's
arms.[86] Luke escapes the Death Star with his father's body and cremates it in a pyre on Endor. As the Rebels celebrate the Death
Star's destruction and the Empire's defeat, Luke sees the spirits of Anakin, Yoda (Frank Oz), and Obi-Wan watching over him.[86]
Prequel trilogy
In Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace, which takes place 32 years before A New Hope, Anakin appears as a nine-year-old
slave[32] living on Tatooine with his mother Shmi (Pernilla August). In addition to being a gifted pilot and mechanic, Anakin has built
his own protocol droid, C-3PO. Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) meets Anakin after making an emergency landing on
Tatooine with Queen of Naboo Padmé Amidala (Natalie Portman). Qui-Gon learns from Shmi that Anakin was conceived without a
father and can foresee the future. Qui-Gon senses Anakin's strong connection to the Force and becomes convinced that he is the
"Chosen One" of Jedi prophecy who will bring balance to the Force. After winning his freedom in a podrace wager, Anakin leaves
with Qui-Gon to be trained as a Jedi on Coruscant, but is forced to leave his mother behind. During the journey, Anakin forms a bond
with Padmé. Qui-Gon asks the Jedi Council for permission to train Anakin, but they sense fear in the boy and refuse. Eventually,
Anakin helps end the Trade Federation's invasion of Naboo by destroying their control ship. After Qui-Gon is killed in a lightsaber
duel with Sith Lord Darth Maul (portrayed by Ray Park, voiced by Peter Serafinowicz), Qui-Gon's apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi
(Ewan McGregor) promises to train Anakin, with the council's reluctant approval.[86] Palpatine, newly elected as the Galactic
Republic's Chancellor, befriends Anakin and tells him that he will watch his career "with great interest".
In Episode II: Attack of the Clones, which takes place 10 years after The Phantom Menace, 19-year-old Anakin is still Obi-Wan's
Padawan apprentice. Over the years, he has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is holding him back. After
rescuing Padmé from an assassination attempt, Anakin travels with her to Naboo as her bodyguard, and they fall in love. Sensing that
Shmi is in pain, Anakin travels with Padmé to Tatooine to rescue his mother. While there, Anakin learns that Shmi had been freed by
and married farmer Cliegg Lars (Jack Thompson) a few years after he left. He then visits Cliegg and learns from him that she was
kidnapped by Tusken Raiders. Anakin locates Shmi at a Tusken campsite, where she dies in his arms. Anakin, enraged, massacres the
Tusken tribe and returns to the Lars homestead to bury Shmi.[86] Anakin then travels with Padmé to Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan
from Sith Lord Count Dooku (Christopher Lee). Dooku captures the trio and sentences them to death. However, a battalion of Jedi
arrives with an army of clone troopers to halt the executions. Obi-Wan and Anakin confront Dooku, but the Sith Lord beats them both
in a lightsaber duel and severs Anakin's arm. After being rescued by Yoda, Anakin is fitted with a robotic arm and marries Padmé in a
secret ceremony.
In Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, set three years after Attack of the Clones, Anakin is now a
Jedi Knight and a hero of the Clone Wars. He and Obi-Wan lead a mission to rescue
Palpatine from Separatist commander General Grievous (voiced by Matthew Wood). The
two Jedi battle Count Dooku, whom Anakin overpowers and decapitates at Palpatine's
urging. They rescue Palpatine and return to Coruscant. Anakin reunites with Padmé, who
tells him that she is pregnant. Although initially excited, Anakin soon begins to have
nightmares about Padmé dying in childbirth.[86] Palpatine also appoints Anakin to the Jedi
Council as his personal representative. Suspicious of Palpatine, the Council allows Anakin as
a member, but declines to grant him the rank of Jedi Master and instead instructs him to spy
on Palpatine, diminishing Anakin's trust in the Jedi. Later, Palpatine reveals to Anakin that he
is the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, and says that only he has the power to save Padmé from
dying. Anakin reports Palpatine's treachery to Jedi Master Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson),
who confronts and subdues Palpatine. Desperate to save Padmé, Anakin intervenes on
Palpatine's behalf and disarms Windu, allowing Palpatine to kill him. Anakin then pledges
himself to the Sith, and Palpatine dubs him Darth Vader.[86]

Hayden Christensen as Anakin
Skywalker in Revenge of the Sith
(2005)

On Palpatine's orders, Vader leads the 501st Legion to kill everyone in the Jedi Temple,
including the children, and then goes to the volcanic planet Mustafar to assassinate the Separatist Council. A distraught Padmé goes to
Mustafar and implores Vader to abandon the dark side, but he refuses. Sensing Obi-Wan's presence, and thinking that they are
conspiring to kill him, Vader angrily uses the Force to strangle Padmé to unconsciousness. Obi-Wan engages Vader in a lightsaber
duel that ends with Obi-Wan severing Vader's limbs and leaving him for dead on the banks of a lava flow, severely burned. Palpatine

finds a barely alive Vader and takes him to Coruscant, where his mutilated body is treated and covered in the black suit first depicted
in the original trilogy. When Vader asks if Padmé is safe, Palpatine says that he killed her out of anger, devastating Vader. At the end
of the film, Vader supervises the construction of the first Death Star alongside Palpatine and Tarkin (Wayne Pygram).
Sequel trilogy
Vader's melted helmet appears in The Force Awakens (2015), in which Vader's grandson Kylo Ren (Adam Driver) is seen addressing
him, though Vader does not appear in the film. At one point, his helmet was considered as the film's MacGuffin.[87] The helmet
appears again in The Rise of Skywalker (2019), when Kylo briefly meditates with it, and during the film's first duel between Kylo and
Rey (Daisy Ridley), during which it is last seen on Kijimi, which is later destroyed. The film also reveals that the voice which Ren
perceived coming from Vader's helmet in The Force Awakens was generated by Palpatine.
In The Rise of Skywalker, Anakin makes a vocal cameo, along with other "voices of Jedi Past", where he encourages Rey to "bring
back the balance... as [he] did" before she faces a resurrected Palpatine.[88][89]

Other Star Wars films
The Clone Wars (film)
In the 2008 3D animated film The Clone Wars, Yoda (voiced by Tom Kane) assigns Ahsoka Tano (voiced by Ashley Eckstein) as
Anakin's Padawan apprentice, a responsibility Anakin is at first reluctant to accept. Anakin calls her "Snips" for her "snippy" attitude,
while Ahsoka calls him "Skyguy" as a pun on his surname.[86] After earning Anakin's respect during a dangerous mission, Ahsoka
joins him on a quest to rescue Jabba the Hutt's infant son, Rotta. Her impetuousness both annoys and endears her to her master, and
Anakin develops a friendly affection for his apprentice.
Anthology films
In the first anthology film Rogue One, Vader makes a cameo appearance in which he meets with Imperial weapons engineer Orson
Krennic (Ben Mendelsohn), who asks him for an audience with the Emperor regarding the Death Star, which Krennic lost command
of to Tarkin. Vader refuses, however, using the Force to choke him, and ordering him to ensure that the Death Star project has not
been compromised. At the end of the film, Vader boards the disabled Rebel flagship Profundity with a cadre of 501st Legion troopers
and kills several Rebel soldiers as he attempts to recover the plans. However, the docked blockade runner Tantive IV escapes with the
plans, setting up the events of A New Hope.

Television series
Clone Wars (2003–2005)
Anakin is a lead character in all three seasons of the Clone Wars micro-series, which takes place shortly after the conclusion of Attack
of the Clones. Anakin becomes a Jedi Knight and is quickly promoted to a General of the Republic's Clone Army, due in part to
Palpatine's (voiced by Nick Jameson) influence. Among other missions, he fights a duel with Dooku's apprentice Asajj Ventress
(voiced by Grey DeLisle), helps Obi-Wan (voiced by James Arnold Taylor) capture a Separatist-controlled fortress and rescues Jedi
Master Saesee Tiin (voiced by Dee Bradley Baker) during a space battle. During the third season, Anakin frees a planet's indigenous
species from Separatist control and sees a cryptic vision of his future as Darth Vader. In the seasons finale, Anakin and Obi-Wan go
on a mission to rescue Palpatine from General Grievous, leading to the opening of Revenge of the Sith.
The Clone Wars (2008–2014, 2020)
Anakin is a lead character in all seasons of The Clone Wars. As a Jedi Knight, he leads the 501st Legion on missions with both his
master Obi-Wan and apprentice Ahsoka Tano throughout the war. Some of Anakin's actions taken out of concern for Ahsoka violate
the Jedi code, such as torturing prisoners who may know her location when she goes missing.[90] Throughout the series there are
several references to Anakin's eventual fall to the dark side, including visions of his future as Darth Vader in the third season, and
disillusion with the Jedi Council after they wrongly accuse Ahsoka of bombing the Jedi Temple in the fifth season. While she is later
forgiven after the true culprit is found, she nonetheless chooses to leave the Jedi Order.[91] Anakin appears as Vader in the final scene
of the series finale, some time after Revenge of the Sith. He investigates the crash site of Ahsoka's Star Destroyer, which collapsed
during her battle with her clone troopers after Darth Sidious issued Order 66, turning the clones against the Jedi. Finding her
lightsaber among the wreckage, Vader assumes that his former Padawan has perished and leaves with the lightsaber. While holding
Ahsoka's lightasber, Vader's eyes briefly turn blue, indicating that Anakin is not completely lost to the dark side.

Rebels (2014–2018)
Darth Vader appears in two episodes of the first season of Star Wars Rebels, which takes place 14 years after The Clone Wars
concludes, and serves as the main antagonist of its second season.[92] Vader leads a squadron of Force-sensitive Imperial Inquisitors
who actively search for and kill any remaining Jedi and Force-sensitive children. In the second-season premiere, Vader orchestrates
the murder of Minister Maketh Tua, an Imperial who tried to defect to the rebellion, and confronts the rebel crew of the Ghost. When
he later attacks the fleet of the Phoenix Squadron, Vader discovers that Ahsoka is still alive and has joined the Rebel Alliance,[93]
while Ahsoka is overwhelmed when she recognizes Anakin under "a layer of hate" in Darth Vader. The Emperor orders Vader to
dispatch an Inquisitor to capture her.[40] Later in the season, Ahsoka has a vision in which Anakin blames her for allowing him to fall
to the dark side. In the season finale, Ahsoka duels with her former master inside a Sith Temple, allowing her friends to escape Vader
and the temple's destruction. As the episode concludes, Vader escapes from the temple's ruins. Vader makes a final voiceless cameo in
the late fourth-season episode "A World Between Worlds", in which it is revealed that Ahsoka escaped from her previous duel with
Vader by entering a Force-realm. Shortly afterward, Vader's voice is heard echoing in the void.
Forces of Destiny (2017–2018)
Anakin Skywalker appears in multiple episodes of the 2D animated online micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny.[76]

Canon literature
In the first chapter of the novelization of The Phantom Menace, Anakin participates in a podrace[94] through Beggar's Canyon on
Tatooine. This parallels his future son Luke's flights through the same canyon as mentioned in A New Hope.[95]
Star Wars: Lords of the Sith was one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.[96] In it, Vader and Palpatine find
themselves hunted by revolutionaries on the Twi'lek planet Ryloth.[97][98]
Comics
In 2015, Marvel released a 25-issue series called Darth Vader (2015–16),[99] written by Kieron Gillen. It focuses on the Sith lord in
the aftermath of the Death Star's destruction, as well as his life after learning about his son's existence,[100] and introduces franchise
fan favorite character Doctor Aphra.[101] This series takes place parallel to the comic book series Star Wars, in which Vader and Luke
meet;[102] the two series have a crossover titled Vader Down.[103]
The five-issue mini-series Obi-Wan & Anakin (2016), written by Charles Soule, depicts the lives of the titular Jedi between The
Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones. At New York Comic Con 2015, Soule described the story as "pretty unexplored
territory".[104]
A prequel-era series, also called Darth Vader (sometimes subtitled Dark Lord of the Sith) and featuring the same logo, was also
written by Soule and published 2017–18. It begins immediately after Vader wakes up in his armor at the end of Revenge of the Sith
and focuses on his emotional transformation upon learning of Padmé's death, his adjustment to his mechanical suit, how he creates his
red-bladed lightsaber, and his hunting of Jedi in the Inquisitor program introduced in Rebels.[105] Its final issue indicates that Palpatine
used the Force to conceive Anakin in utero,[106] as some fans had theorized that Revenge of the Sith implies.[107][g] A Lucasfilm story
group member later clarified that "This is all in Anakin's head", and Soule elaborated that "The Dark Side is not a reliable
narrator."[108]
A third series titled Darth Vader debuted in 2020; it is written by Greg Pak and set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of
the Jedi.[109] The series features Vader returning to Naboo to visit Padmé's tomb.[110]

Virtual reality game
In the 2015 Star Wars Celebration, it was announced David S. Goyer was helping to develop a virtual reality game series based on
Darth Vader. As an observer with limited influence, the player is able to walk, pick up, push and open things, and possibly affect the
story.[111] The game, titled Vader Immortal, had three episodes overall, set between Revenge of the Sith and Rogue One; the first
became available with the launch of Oculus Quest,[112] while the last episode was released on November 21, 2019.[113] The game
was later ported to the Oculus Rift. On August 25, 2020, all three episodes were also released on PlayStation VR.[114]

Legends
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded
by Lucasfilm as Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.[96][115]

Books
Vader is featured prominently in novels set in the Star Wars universe. In the 1978 novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye by Alan Dean
Foster, Vader meets Luke Skywalker for the first time and engages him in a lightsaber duel that ends with Luke cutting off Vader's
arm and Vader falling into a deep pit.[52] Shadows of the Empire (1996) reveals that Vader is conflicted about trying to turn his son to
the dark side of the Force, and knows deep down that there is still some good in himself.
Vader's supposedly indestructible glove is the MacGuffin of the young-reader's book The Glove of Darth Vader (1992). Anakin
Skywalker's redeemed spirit appears in The Truce at Bakura (1993), set a few days after the end of Return of the Jedi. He appears to
Leia, imploring her forgiveness.[h] In Tatooine Ghost (2003), Leia learns to forgive her father after learning about his childhood as a
slave and his mother's traumatic death. In The Unifying Force (2003), Anakin tells his grandson Jacen Solo to "stand firm" in his
battle with the Supreme Overlord of the Yuuzhan Vong.
Upon the release of the prequel films, the Expanded Universe grew to include novels about Vader's former life as Anakin Skywalker.
Greg Bear's 2000 novel Rogue Planet and Jude Watson's Jedi Quest series chronicle Anakin's early missions with Obi-Wan, while
James Luceno's 2005 novel Labyrinth of Evil, set during the Clone Wars, depicts Anakin battling Separatist commander General
Grievous. In Luceno's Dark Lord: The Rise of Darth Vader (2005), set a few months after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Vader
disavows his identity as Skywalker as he systematically pursues and kills the surviving Jedi and cements his position in the Empire.
The novel reveals that Vader plans to eventually overthrow Palpatine and that he betrayed the Jedi because he resented their supposed
failure to recognize his power.
In the Dark Nest trilogy (2005), Luke and Leia uncover old recordings of their parents in R2-D2's memory drive; for the first time,
they see their own birth and their mother's death, as well as their father's corruption to the dark side. In Bloodlines (2006), Han and
Leia's son Jacen – who has himself turned to the dark side – uses the Force to "watch" Darth Vader slaughter the children at the Jedi
Temple.
Vader also appears in a series of tongue-in-cheek children's books by Jeffrey Brown.[116] In Brown's series, a hapless Vader sets out
to be a father to a young Luke and Leia, with some scenes portraying light-hearted versions of their darker film counterparts (for
example, one scene shows Vader, Luke and Leia at the carbonite freezing chamber on Bespin, with Vader pronouncing the freezer
adequate for making ice cream).
Comics
Vader appears in several comic books such as Marvel Comics' Star Wars (1977–1986). Anakin Skywalker is a major character in
Dark Horse Comics' Star Wars: Republic series (1998–2006). In Boba Fett: Enemy of the Empire (1999), Vader hires Fett a few years
before the events of A New Hope. In Vader's Quest (1999), set soon after A New Hope, the dark lord encounters Luke for the first
time.[i] Star Wars: Empire (2002–2005) spans from about a year before A New Hope to several months afterwards. Anakin and Vader
appear in the non-canonical Star Wars Tales (1999–2005); in the story Resurrection, Darth Maul is resurrected and faces Vader in
battle.[118]
Vader-centric comics released and set just after Revenge of the Sith include Dark Times (2006–2013), Darth Vader and the Lost
Command (2011), Darth Vader and the Ghost Prison (2012), and Darth Vader and the Cry of Shadows (2013–14).

Video games
Darth Vader and Anakin Skywalker have appeared in a number of Star Wars since the earliest days of the franchise, though rarely as
a playable character. Vader plays a central role in Star Wars: The Force Unleashed (2008), where he is the playable character for the
first level of the game. He also appears in the sequel Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II as the final boss. Darth Vader has also
appeared in non-Star Wars video games as a guest character, for example Soulcalibur IV (2008).
Most recently, Vader makes a cameo appearance in the final mission of Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order, after the main antagonist, the
Second Sister, is defeated. After Vader kills her for her failure to retrieve a Jedi Holocron, the protagonist, Padawan Cal Kestis, must
escape from Vader, who attempts to get the Holocron in his possession. Cal is ultimately able to escape from Vader's grasp with the
help of his allies.

Other
In the Star Wars Holiday Special, a television special broadcast by CBS in 1978, features a brief appearance by Darth Vader, who
appears on-screen speaking with Imperial officer "Chief Bast" in footage cut from the original 1977 film. The sequence is dubbed
with new dialogue, performed by James Earl Jones. In the story, Vader colludes with Boba Fett to entrap the Rebels.[119]

Darth Vader features in the 1981 radio drama adaptation of Star Wars, voiced by the actor Brock Peters. Vader makes his first
appearance on the planet Ralltiir, where he treats Princess Leia with suspicion. In later extended scenes, he is heard interrogating and
torturing Leia on board his Star Destroyer and aboard the Death Star.[120][121]
Vader appears in Star Tours – The Adventures Continue, where he is once again voiced by Jones.[122]
An action figure of Vader comes to life alongside RoboCop and Jurassic Park toys in The Indian in the Cupboard (1995).[123] Vader
also had a brief cameo in Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009), in which he and Oscar the Grouch try
unsuccessfully to join the army formed by Ivan the Terrible, Napoleon and Al Capone.[124][125]

Relationships
Family tree
Skywalker family[162] tree
Darth Vader's aunt Aika Lars.[n 1]

Darth Vader's cousin in law Beru Whitesun.

Darth Vader's uncle Cliegg Lars.

Darth Vader's cousin Owen Lars.

Darth Vader's Mother Shmi Skywalker.

Darth Vader's Father in law Jobal Naberrie.[n 2]

Darth Vader's Mother in law Ruwee Naberrie.[n 2]

Anakin
Skywalker
Darth Vader

Darth Vader's Son Luke Skywalker.[n 5]

Bail
Organa[n 3]

Darth Vader's Wife Padmé Amidala.

Darth Vader's Daughter Leia Organa.[n 6]

House of
Organa

Breha
Organa[n 4]

Darth Vader's Son in law Han Solo.[n 6]

Darth Vader's Grandson Ben Solo.
Kylo Ren

Notes:
1. Appears in Pablo Hidalgo's Star Wars Character Encyclopedia: Updated and Expanded (2016)
2. Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005)
3. Adopted father of Leia Organa, as established in Revenge of the Sith (2005)
4. Adopted mother of Leia Organa, as established in Revenge of the Sith (2005)
5. In the non-canonical Star Wars Expanded Universe (Legends), Luke is married to Mara Jade and has a son, Ben Skywalker.
6. In the Legends continuity, Han and Leia have three children: Jaina, Jacen and Anakin Solo.

Mentorship tree
Jedi Order master-apprentice relationship
Yoda

Younglings

Count Dooku

Mace Windu

Qui-Gon Jinn

Depa Billaba

Obi-Wan
Kenobi

Kanan Jarrus

Anakin
Skywalker

Ahsoka Tano

Luke
Skywalker

Ezra Bridger

Leia Organa

Ben Solo

Rey


