R2D2
R2D2 (/ˌɑːtuːˈdiːtuː/) or Artoo-Detoo[1] is a fictional character in the
Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas. He has appeared in ten
of the eleven Star Wars films to date. At various points throughout the
course of the films, R2, an astromech droid, is a friend to C-3PO,
Padmé Amidala, Anakin Skywalker, Leia Organa, Luke Skywalker,
Obi-Wan Kenobi, BB-8, Rey and D-O. R2D2 and his companion C3PO are the only characters to appear in every Star Wars film, with
the exception of Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018).
English actor Kenny Baker played R2D2 in all three original Star
Wars films and received billing credit for the character in the prequel
trilogy, where Baker's role was reduced as R2D2 was portrayed
mainly by radio controlled props and CGI models. In the sequel
trilogy, Baker was credited as consultant for The Force Awakens;
however, Jimmy Vee also co-performed the character in some scenes.
Vee later took over the role beginning in The Last Jedi.[2] In The Rise
of Skywalker, puppeteers Hassan Taj and Lee Towersey perform the
role of R2D2, replacing Jimmy Vee, who had played the role in the
previous two films. His sounds and vocal effects were created by
sound designer Ben Burtt.
R2D2 was designed in artwork by Ralph McQuarrie, co-developed
by John Stears and built by Peteric Engineering. The revised Empire
Strikes Back droids had fibreglass shells built by Tony Dyson and his
White Horse Toy Company.

R2D2
Star Wars character

First
Star Wars (1977)
appearance
Created by

George Lucas

Portrayed
by

Kenny Baker
(Episodes I–VI;
Episode VII,
consultant)

Contents

Jimmy Vee (Episodes
VII–VIII)

Design

Hassan Taj/Lee
Towersey (Episode
IX)

Appearances
Skywalker saga
Anthology films
Television
Novels and comics
Other films

Voiced by

Nickname

Artoo (R2)

Production

Species

Robot

Ben Burtt

In-universe information

Cultural influence

R2 Unit

See also

Occupation Astromech droid

Notes

Affiliation

Kingdom of Naboo

References

Galactic Republic

External links

Rebel Alliance
New Republic

Design

Resistance
C-3PO

George Lucas's creation of R2D2 was influenced by Akira Homeworld Naboo
Kurosawa's 1958 feature film The Hidden Fortress (released in the
United States in 1962), particularly Tahei and Matashichi, the two comic relief characters that serve as
sidekicks to General Makabe. Lucas and artist Ralph McQuarrie also drew inspiration from the robots Huey,
Dewey, and Louie from Douglas Trumbull's 1972 film Silent Running.
The name derives from when Lucas was making one of his earlier films, American Graffiti. Sound editor
Walter Murch states that he is responsible for the utterance which sparked the name for the droid. Murch asked
for Reel 2, Dialog Track 2, in the abbreviated form "R-2-D-2". Lucas, who was in the room and had dozed off
while working on the script for Star Wars, momentarily woke when he heard the request and, after asking for
clarification, stated that it was a "great name" before going back to writing his script.[3][4]
R2D2 stands for Second Generation Robotic Droid Series-2, according to a Star Wars encyclopedia
published after the release of the film Star Wars.[5] Tony Dyson, owner of the special effects studio The White
Horse Toy Company, was commissioned by special effects supervisor Brian Johnson to fabricate the revised
mechanical design for the Empire Strikes Back, making several units operated by remote control. A number
were used by Baker, and two were stunt double models made for the scene where the droid was shot from the
swamp onto the shore on Dagobah.

Appearances
Skywalker saga
Original trilogy
Episode IV: A New Hope
In A New Hope, R2D2 and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) are both introduced on board the Tantive IV, along
with Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) of Alderaan, when they are being pursued upon by Darth Vader (portrayed
by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) aboard an Imperial Star Destroyer. Leia inserts into R2D2 an
information disc containing the plans for the Death Star battle station, and encodes a distress message on the
droid's holographic projector. The droids then escape in a pod that crashes on Tatooine near Jedi Master ObiWan Kenobi's (Alec Guinness) desert abode.
R2D2 and C-3PO are then abducted by Jawas and bought by Owen (Phil Brown) and Beru Lars (Shelagh
Fraser), step-uncle and -aunt of Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill). While Luke cleans the sand out of R2D2's
gears, he discovers a fragment of Leia's message, and removes the droid's restraining bolt to see more; once
free of the bolt, R2 claims to have no knowledge of the message. That night, R2D2 leaves the farm to seek
out Obi-Wan. When Owen and Beru are killed by Imperial stormtroopers, Luke is forced to leave Tatooine
with Obi-Wan, Han Solo (Harrison Ford), and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) on board the Millennium Falcon
to deliver R2D2 to the Rebel Alliance. On their arrival at Alderaan's co-ordinates, they are pulled in by the
Death Star's tractor beam and are forced to land, but eventually rescue Princess Leia. After Vader kills ObiWan, the rest of the group escapes and delivers the Death Star plans to the Rebel Alliance. R2 later serves as
Luke's droid during the attack on the station. R2D2 is severely damaged during the battle, but is repaired
before the ceremony at the end of the film.

Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back
In The Empire Strikes Back, R2D2 accompanies Luke to Dagobah, and later to Cloud City, where he helps to
rescue and repair a heavily damaged C-3PO and to override city security computers. He also manages to
reactivate the Millennium Falcon's hyperdrive, resulting in a last-minute escape from Imperial forces.
Episode VI: Return of the Jedi
In Return of the Jedi, R2D2 plays a critical role in rescuing Luke, Leia, and Han from Jabba the Hutt. He
later joins the Rebel strike team on Endor. He is badly damaged during the battle between the Imperial troops
and the Rebels, but is repaired in time for the celebration marking the second Death Star's destruction and the
fall of the Empire.
Prequel trilogy
Episode I: The Phantom Menace
In Episode I – The Phantom Menace, set 32 years before A New Hope, R2D2 is portrayed as belonging to
the Naboo defense forces, one of four astromech droids deployed for repair duty on Queen Padmé Amidala's
(Natalie Portman) starship as it attempts to get past the Trade Federation blockade. The sole survivor of the
four, R2D2 becomes part of Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn's (Liam Neeson) party on Tatooine and meets C-3PO
and Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd). Later still, he serves as the astromech droid for Anakin's starfighter
during the Battle of Naboo.
Episode II: Attack of the Clones
In Episode II – Attack of the Clones, set 10 years after The Phantom Menace, R2D2 again serves Anakin
(Hayden Christensen) and Obi-Wan (Ewan McGregor). He accompanies Anakin and Padmé to Naboo, and
then to Tatooine when Anakin tries to rescue his mother Shmi (Pernilla August). Here, he is reunited with C3PO, and the two get into various misadventures on Geonosis. He and C-3PO are later witness to Anakin and
Padmé's secret wedding.
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
In Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, R2D2 helps Anakin and Obi-Wan in their mission to rescue Chancellor
Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) from Count Dooku's (Christopher Lee) capital ship, the Invisible Hand. He is
attacked by battle droids, but defeats them through ingenious tactics. After Anakin falls to the dark side of the
Force and becomes Darth Vader, he takes R2D2 with him when he goes to assassinate the Separatist council,
but tells him to stay with the ship. After the Galactic Empire is established at the end of the film, C-3PO's
memory is erased to keep the knowledge of the locations of Vader and Padmé’s newborn children, Luke and
Leia, a secret from their father. However, R2D2's memory is not wiped; as a result, R2D2 is the only
surviving character at the end of the saga who knows the entire story of the Skywalker family. Both R2D2
and C-3PO end up in the possession of Captain Raymus Antilles (Rohan Nichol) onboard the Tantive IV.
Sequel trilogy
Episode VII: The Force Awakens

In Star Wars: The Force Awakens, set approximately 30 years after Return of the Jedi, R2D2 is revealed to be
kept in storage at the Resistance base on the planet D'Qar, having put himself in a low-power mode after Luke
Skywalker's disappearance. He later awakens and reveals Luke's location by combining map data stored in his
memory with that of the droid BB-8. He then travels with Rey (Daisy Ridley) and Chewbacca to the planet
highlighted on the map, where they find Luke in self-imposed exile. In the credits, Kenny Baker was credited
as 'R2D2 consultant,' while Jimmy Vee provided an uncredited portrayal in some scenes.
Episode VIII: The Last Jedi
R2D2 appeared in Star Wars: The Last Jedi, with actor Jimmy Vee taking over the role from Kenny Baker,
who retired from the role due to his age and health. Baker died in August 2016.[6][7]
R2D2 has a brief but pivotal role in the film, reuniting with Luke aboard the Millennium Falcon and showing
him Leia's distress message from the first film in a successful attempt to convince Luke to train Rey. He is later
shown interfacing with the Falcon's computer while Rey and Chewbacca pilot the ship amid the final
confrontation with the evil First Order’s forces.
Episode IX: The Rise of Skywalker
R2D2 returns once more in Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker. Initially remaining at the Resistance base, he is
shown watching Leia as she dies. He later plays an important role in restoring C-3PO's memory after Rey,
Finn (John Boyega) and Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) are forced to erase it so the droid can translate a Sith
artefact that holds a clue to the location of the Sith homeworld and the new fleet of the resurrected Palpatine.
R2D2 accompanies Poe in his X-wing for the final assault, and is later shown joining the others in celebrating
the defeat of Palpatine and the Sith Eternal.

Anthology films
Rogue One
R2D2 makes a cameo appearance in Rogue One alongside C-3PO.[8]

Television
R2D2 and C-3PO had their own animated series, Star Wars: Droids, set before they came into Luke
Skywalker's possession. This was excluded from the new canon in 2014.[9]
R2D2 appears in the 2008 animated film Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and the subsequent TV series of the
same name. In the film, he accompanies Anakin (voiced by Matt Lanter) and his Padawan Ahsoka Tano
(voiced by Ashley Eckstein) on a mission to rescue Jabba the Hutt's son Rotta. In the series, he helps them
fight the Separatists.
R2D2 also appears in Star Wars Rebels in the episodes "Droids in Distress" and "Blood Sisters".

Novels and comics

The novelization of Attack of the Clones makes it clear that R2D2 has been in Padmé's possession since the
events of The Phantom Menace. R2D2 appears in Marvel's 2015 Star Wars comic series, which is set
between the films of the original trilogy. He also appears briefly in the miniseries Star Wars: Shattered Empire.
Legends
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels
and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and
declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.[9][10][11]
In the various Star Wars novels and comics, the droid duo have played a small but significant
role. In the Expanded Universe novel The Swarm War, R2D2 inadvertently helps Luke and
Leia come to grips with their heritage when an electronic glitch unearths long-concealed
images of Anakin relating his fear of losing Padmé, and of Padmé's death.
In issue No. 12 of Star Wars: Legacy, R2D2 is revealed to have survived the resulting 88 years
after his last appearance and has been upgraded to the latest technology. In this series, he now
serves another member of the Skywalker family – reluctant Jedi Cade Skywalker.

Other films
Along with the Star Wars films, R2D2 makes non-canon cameo appearances in several other films, such as
Star Trek and Star Trek Into Darkness, where his was seen flying in debris, in Close Encounters of the Third
Kind he is seen on the underside of the alien ship, in Raiders of the Lost Ark, he is seen on the wall of the
room containing the Ark, and in Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen, the robot was seen flying among rubble
and debris in the sky, in Ready Player One, R2D2 is also seen as a toy model in Wade and Samantha'a
apartment, he also appears in the Wreck-It Ralph sequel, Ralph Breaks the Internet.
In an early script to 2014's The Lego Movie, R2D2 was set to be one of the main characters, but was written
out due to the directors failing to obtain the rights to the character.[12][13]

Production
Several R2D2 models were built for the original Star Wars films; one that was remote controlled and rolled on
three wheeled legs, and others which were worn by English actor Kenny Baker and walked on two
legs.[14][15] Deep Roy (who also doubled Yoda in several scenes), served as Baker's double, in both Episodes
V and VI; providing stunts and filling in when Baker was unavailable.[16][17][18] The original props for Star
Wars Episode IV: A New Hope were designed by John Stears and built by Stears' team and Peteric
Engineering. The revised fibreglass droids used in The Empire Strikes Back were built by Tony Dyson and
the White Horse Toy Company. The radio controlled R2 was operated by John Stears in A New Hope, Brian
Johnson in The Empire Strikes Back and by Kit West in Return of the Jedi.
Kenny Baker, who portrayed R2D2 in costume, was not involved in the Star Wars Holiday Special. R2 was
portrayed entirely by a radio controlled unit, operated by Mick Garris[19] (Lucas' receptionist at the
time).[18][20][21] In the credits, R2D2 is credited as playing himself. Garris later went on to operate the radio
controlled R2 at various events, including the Oscars.[22]
There were a total of 15 R2D2s on the set of Attack of the Clones. Eight were radio-controlled; two were
worn by Baker; the remainder were stunt models that could be moved by puppet strings or towed by wires.
The robotic R2s were prone to failure, particularly while shooting the Tatooine scenes in Tunisia.[23]

Radio controlled units were extensively utilised for the Prequel trilogy, due to advances in technology, though
Baker was still used in some scenes. R2D2 had three principal operators: Don Bies,[24][25] Jolyon
Bambridge[26][27] and Grant Imahara.[28][29]
The sound effects for R2D2's "voice" were created by sound designer Ben Burtt, using an ARP 2600 analog
synthesizer, as well as his own vocalizations processed through other effects.[30] Original props of R2D2 and
C-3PO are used as Audio-Animatronics in the queue area of Disneyland's Star Tours–The Adventures
Continue attraction.
Although Kenny Baker is credited, Anthony Daniels (who portrays C-3PO) has stated that Baker did not film
any scenes in Revenge of the Sith.[31] Baker himself has said he probably only appears in footage caught while
shooting the previous two movies.[32]
For The Force Awakens, producer Kathleen Kennedy hired two fans, Lee Towersey and Oliver Steeples, to
build new R2D2 robots for the film, after being impressed by their working replicas that were brought to Star
Wars Celebration Europe in 2013.[33]

Cultural influence
R2D2 was inducted into the Robot Hall of Fame in
2003. The Smithsonian Institution included R2D2 in its
list of 101 Objects that Made America.[34]
The Phalanx CIWS is nicknamed R2D2 due to the
shape of the radar housing.[35]
Marc Rotenberg of the Electronic Privacy Information
Center called a security robot intended for schools and
malls R2D2's "evil twin"; William Santana Li, who cofounded the company that built the robot, said he wanted
people to think of the robot as "a mash-up of Batman,
Minority Report and R2D2".[36]

In 2015 All Nippon Airways unveiled a Boeing 7879 in a special R2D2 livery, which is colloquially
referred to as R2D2JET; this aircraft is seen here
at Tokyo International Airport (March 2016)

R2D2 and C-3PO guest starred in a series of segments
of Sesame Street in 1978. The two droids were featured as presenters at the 50th Academy Awards.
Ewan McGregor, who portrayed Obi-Wan Kenobi in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, said in an interview, "As
soon as R2D2 comes on the set, everyone goes a bit silly." He said "there is something about him that makes
you feel great affection for him". In the DVD audio commentary for Revenge of the Sith, George Lucas says
R2D2 is his favorite character, and that it is intentional that R2D2 saves the day at least once in every film.
R2D2 is parodied in several episodes of Family Guy. The final scene in "Blind Ambition" where Peter
Griffin receives a medal of honor after a blind Peter saves Horace's life parodies the ending in the original
1977 Star Wars. In the episodes parodying the original Star Wars trilogy, Cleveland Brown plays R2D2's
role, while Quagmire plays C-3PO.
The 2015 Israeli sci-fi comedy OMG, I'm a Robot! features "Robo Joseph" – a "Jewish R2D2" dubbed by
Rob Schneider.
In 2015, Hasbro released a Bop It game using the design of R2D2 on September 4, 2015 for "Force Friday".
The top part of the unit (his head) becomes the 'Bop It' button, the bottom part of his head becomes the 'Twist
It' and his legs are the 'Pull It'. The game is based on the Bop It Micro Series and the voice is replaced with

voice recordings from C-3PO. Instead of the game saying "I'm going to sleep." before the unit shuts off, this
version says "I'll just switch off for a while."[37]
The navigation system of the SR-71 plane has been 'affectionately' called R2D2.[38] The system had like R2D2 navigational purposes and was mounted behind the pilot directed upward.
The telescope dome of Zweibrücken Observatory in Germany was repainted to resemble R2D2 in 2018.[39]
In the Latin American Spanish dubbing of the Star Wars films, the name R2D2 is pronounced as "Arturito" (Little Arthur), which sounds similar to the
English pronunciation.[40]
In the Italian version of the original trilogy, R2D2 was named "C1-P8".[41]
Anglicisms were not common in the Italian language during the 1970s and
1980s, and the names of various characters were changed to be easier to
pronounce and recognize for Italian speakers. Some of these changes were
reverted in the dubbing of the prequel and sequel trilogies, where the original
name R2D2 was used instead. Other name changes in the Italian version of
the original trilogy include C-3PO, Han Solo, Leia Organa and Darth Vader,
who were called respectively "D-3BO", "Ian Solo", "Leila Organa" and
"Dart Fener" (or "Lord Fener").

